 For fans in India, Sachin Tendulkar is "God of cricket." Whenever Tendulkar plays, fans follow every detail of his batting innings, be it a domestic game or international. On Sunday, when the Master Blaster reached to his century in Ranji Trophy quarter-finals against Baroda at Wankhede Stadium, a fan made a long trip from the stands to the pitch just to touch the feet of Tendulkar.









Tendulkar himself had said that he doesn't feel comfortable when fans touch his feet. A few years back, in an interview published in "OK!" magazine, he had this to say: "I used to receive letters written in blood...but not any more. It feels strange when a fan comes and touches your feet and says you are God. I don't feel comfortable with it, but it is the way they feel about you...that happened again just a couple of weeks ago actually."

The 39-year-old had to spend some awkward time on Sunday too when a fan touched his feet. Before the umpires could intervene and chase the fan away, the moment was captured on TV and by the shutterbugs at the stadium. Tendulkar resumed his innings and was bowled for 108, his 80th first-class century. This was his first game since retiring from One Day Internationals and he hit form ahead of Australia Test series. Fans are happy to see the Master back.

Posted by Noel at 7:40 PM Links to this post
Labels: God-of-Cricket, Sachin, Sachin-fans, sachin-photos, Sachin-Tendulkar
When Sachin's batting is more important than a wedding ceremony
Yesterday, hundreds of them turned up at the Wankhede Stadium to see the ODI-retired batting great and Tendulkar did not disappoint them through his hundred against Baroda in the Ranji Trophy quarter-final.

Tendulkar, who scored 108 (10x4 and a six), brought up his 18th Ranji Trophy ton with a nudge to long on. He is now two short of Sunil Gavaskar’s 20 Ranji tons, and just one short of Gavaskar’s record of 81 first-class hundreds.



Some spectators at the Vijay Merchant Stand revealed to MiD DAY that they cancelled plans of a Sunday siesta at home when they heard Tendulkar was batting.

As expected, Sachin Tendulkar was cheered on loudly when he walked in to bat at the fall of Hiken Shah’s wicket. His every move was keenly followed as if there was no tomorrow. The crowd drew great pleasure from Tendulkar’s explicit straight and cover drives, and back foot punches. The straight drives stood out.

Tendulkar could well have dominated the Baroda attack, but he preferred to play intently. He consciously stayed away from playing across the line most of the time. He tried to play as straight as possible with most of his runs being scored in the mid-off and mid-on region.

When Tendulkar played a rare uppish shot on the off side, a fan spontaneously remarked: “Sachin paaji neeche se khelo. Sirf aapki batting dekhne aaye hai.” (Please play along the ground… we have only come to see you bat). A loud appeal for leg-before was turned down which prompted a fan to say: “Mehnat karo, mehnat. Sachin ko out karna aasan nahi hai.” (Work hard. It isn’t easy to get Tendulkar’s wicket).

Forget the wedding
A few spectators were dressed in sarees and sherwanis. They slipped off from a wedding ceremony taking place at the Mumbai Cricket Association’s banquet hall to catch a glimpse of Tendulkar’s batting.

The news of Tendulkar playing well spread like fire as seats filled up at a decent pace.

Restlessness slowly started to creep in among fans as Tendulkar decided to deal in singles in between. Chants of ‘Sachin, Sachin’ grew louder, urging the batting maestro to go for big shots. A fan shouted: “Chagdi maar Sachin.” (C’mon, hit a six).

He finally went for one straight down the ground off Ketul Patel much to the delight of the patient fans.

Tendulkar was however, embarrassed when a spectator charged on to the field to touch his feet after scoring his hundred. A big inswinging delivery from Murtuja Vahora that sneaked through Tendulkar’s bat and pad to send the leg stump cartwheeling crushed all hopes of what was becoming a memorable Sunday.

Tendulkar may have disappointed millions of his fans by retiring from one-day cricket, but the spectators that turned up yesterday gave him a standing ovation just like they would do at his farewell ODI.

Posted by Noel at 7:36 PM Links to this post
Labels: Sachin, Sachin-fans, sachin-photos, Sachin-Tendulkar
Sunday, December 23, 2012
No one can drop Sachin Tendulkar, says Sourav Ganguly
Sourav Ganguly, once part of the formidable opening partnership with Sachin Tendulkar in the limited overs format, today supported the latter's decision to retire from the ODI cricket but thought the senior India batsman would have played the series against Pakistan.

"I felt that he might have played the series against Pakistan. But it is his decision and I think it is the right. There was a doubt on whether he would play ODI cricket or not.

But I am not surprised by his decision. He has done what he thought was right," said Ganguly.

The pair of Tendulkar and Ganguly scored 26 hundred-plus partnerships in ODIs. Of these, 21 century stands were for the opening wicket. Both of these happen to be world records.

He, along with Ganguly, had been involved in 38 hundred-plus partnerships in international cricket (all three forms combined) which is a world record. The 12,400 runs scored by this pair is also a world record.

Ganguly said no one from the national selectors could have asked Tendulkar to retire from the ODI cricket.

"I don't think there was any pressure of selectors on him. It is his own decision. No one can drop him," Ganguly added.

Tendulkar today announced his retirement from ODIs, bringing to an end a glorious 23-year-old career in the format during which he rewrote numerous batting records.

Tendulkar goes out after amassing 18,426 runs in 463 one-dayers at an average of 44.83. The diminutive right-hander has an astonishing 49 hundreds in the format, including a double hundred, the first in this form of the game.

Posted by Noel at 8:19 AM Links to this post
Labels: Sachin, Sachin-Tendulkar, Sachin-Tendulkar-photos
Words are not enough to sing Sachin Tendulkar's praise: Pakistan cricket team
Bangalore:  The Pakistani players on Sunday fell short of words while describing Sachin Tendulkar's impact on world cricket and said the Indian batting legend will be missed sorely in One-day cricket following his retirement.

Tendulkar called it a day on his 23-year-old One-day career on the eve of the series against arch-rivals Pakistan.

Pakistan fast bowler Sohail Tanvir said he enjoyed bowling against Tendulkar because the margin of error was so slim that he could dispatch even good deliveries to the fence.

"In every cricketer's life there comes a day when he decides to hang up his shoes. Words are not enough to describe his achievements for India. He deserves highest of respects in world cricket," he said.

Tanvir wished luck to Sachin and hoped he would smash many more centuries for India in Test matches.

Pakistan captain Mohammad Hafeez said the players of his country feel sad that Tendulkar will not be seen on the field in ODIs.

"To be honest we (Pakistanis) will miss him and feel really sad that he will not play anymore international ODIs for India. I admire the man for his sheer domineering character. He rattled all kinds of bowlers around the world," Hafeez said.

"Sachin is a great entertainer of cricket and wish him good luck for the future," he added.

Another Pakistan quick bowler Umar Gul said the presence of Tendulkar in the India team has immensely contributed in nurturing young cricketers such as Virat Kohli and Suresh Raina.

"I am suer Virat and Raina have learnt a lot from the maestro," he said.

The young batting sensation Umar Amin said he would have loved to play against Tendulkar in the upcoming series.

"I played against India in 2010 Asia Cup, but unfortunately he wasn't there. I would like to say only one thing that if cricket is the religion then Sachin is God," Amin said.

Posted by Noel at 8:15 AM Links to this post
Labels: Sachin, Sachin-Tendulkar
Sachin Tendulkar wished by cricketers on glorious ODI career
Sachin Tendulkar, who on Sunday announced retirement from One-Day Internationals, was congratulated by many cricketers around the globe for his glorious career that spanned over 23 years.

Tendulkar brought an end to an illustrious career in coloured kits that has spread across two decades.
Various cricketers have come out and praised him and have conveyed their heart-felt messages to the great man on Twitter.

Yuvraj Singh: In my heart and fellow indians! The pride of our country I salute to u for ur contribution to indian cricket. Emotional time ! Letting sachin go from one dayers ! 18 thousand plus runs ur jaw drops when u c those records , master u will always live

Pragyan Ojha: The pride of our country ,I salute you for ur contribution to indian cricket @sachin_rt.

Parthiv Patel: Words cant describe his greatness...true legend...greatest batsman ever to play cricket...grt grt grt human being..#respect

Harbhajan Singh: Sachin tendulkar a grt batsman.grt human being.a grt frnd.grt man 2 look up 2.proud indian.Real son of india.I salute u nd luv u

RP Singh: The legend's retirement will be a void felt not only in Indian cricket but World cricket. #RetireTheJerseyNo10

Suresh Raina: "The reason for playing cricket. The reason for watching cricket. Sachin Tendulkar..... No words.. Love you Paji pic.twitter.com/VF4ySwib"

Rohit Sharma: My mentor my hero my friend and my reason for falling in love with the sport. Truly heartbroken

Rahul Sharma: "Sad that I won't be able to see sachin tendulkar paaji on the field fr an ODI again but a huge salute to him and his craft."

Ravi Bopara: Well done to @sachin_rt on his amazing ODI career. Inspiration to millions if not billions. We will never see another Sachin in our lifetime

Hashim Amla: Conclusion of a sterling ODI career from a wonderful batsman. Congrats Sachin Tendulkar 
